# My History with Scouting

I participated in Cub Scouts as a youth in the 1970s, just as many of
others my age. I did not take long to discover that the program was not
for me. I quickly lost interest. The idea of sleeping on the ground in a
tent never really appealed to me.

When I turned 10 years old, I dropped out, never getting past Webelos.
Regretfully, as it turns out, I left the program just before it would
have started to become interesting to me.

## My Own Children

Fast forward a few decades. I was pulled back into scouting when my
oldest son turned 8 years old and joined the Cub Scout Pack chartered by
our church. Recalling my earlier experience, I wanted nothing to do with
it.

I soon discovered that it was not going to be my decision. My boys were
going to be scouts and as their father, I was going to be part of their
lives. That included scouting. I slowly and reluctantly got involved,
though it took a few years.

## Scout Committee and Roundtable

For the first year or so, my role was to drive my son to and from his
weekly cub scout meeting. I was comfortable with that arrangement. We
met in a church building in Nashua, New Hampshire. I brought a laptop
and sat on a sofa in the foyer once a week for a couple of years. No one
asked anything from me, and all was well.

Then my son turned 11. At that age, boys leave Cub Scouting behind and
join a Boy Scout troop.

We had recently moved to central New Hampshire, which had a much smaller
population density than southern New Hampshire. Not only were the scout
troops smaller, but many of them were sorely lacking in adult
leadership. It was apparent that I would no longer be sitting on the
sidelines.

I still remember the first "Roundtable" meeting I attended in Rochester,
New Hampshire. Roundtable is a monthly meeting for adult leaders in the
"district." A district is a geographic collection of scout troops.
Districts provide leadership and training and guidance to its troops.

I had been asked to represent our troop at the district meeting as a
"committee member." I was to introduce myself and work on getting our
troop's registration completed for the upcoming year.

During the announcements of my first roundtable meeting, someone entered
the room dressed in a gorilla costume. I do not remember why they were
dressed that way, but I vividly recall wondering, "what have I gotten
myself into?" If I only knew\...

Over the next few years, I found myself in a variety of administrative
roles, but never actually in a position of a scout leader. This suited
me perfectly, as I still had no desire to do the "outdoors" stuff.

The more I learned, the more impressed I became of the vast organization
required to pull off something of this magnitude. Troops are led by a
scoutmaster, who reports to a group of adults known as the scout
committee. The committee represents the troop at the District level.
Districts are organized into Councils. Councils report to the National
Scouting Headquarters. Each level has its own leadership, both volunteer
and paid. The local leaders are typically volunteers who have youth in
the program, or once did.

## Scoutmaster

Over the next few years, I was unable to avoid the inevitable call to
step away from the administrative roles and into real leadership of the
troop. Our troop needed a scoutmaster. I served as both an assistant
scoutmaster and scoutmaster over the years.

It was during this time that I really learned that scouting is more than
hiking, camping, and building fires. It is about leadership,
citizenship, and becoming responsible adults. Scouting is often called
"a game with a purpose." That purpose is building youth into the next
generation of our country's leaders.

## Training and Safety

The Boy Scouts stress training at all levels of the program. The most
important is that every adult leader must pass a criminal background
check and take Youth Protection Training every two years. No adult may
serve at any level of the troop without this basic minimum level of
training.

From there, every individual role and responsibility has one or more
position-specific training required before a person can service in that
role. Many of these training courses are offered online, but some are
only offered in person.

A few, such as a lifesaving, aquatics supervision, and shooting sports
can only be taught at nationally accredited scout leader training
facilities.

Throughout my decade in scouting, I completed more than two dozen safety
and leadership courses. Some of which appear below:

-   Trainer\'s EDGE

-   Venturing - Advising vs Leading

-   Train-the-Trainer (Fundamentals)

-   Scoutmaster/Assistant Specific Training - Classroom

-   Venturing Leader Specific Training - Classroom

-   Introduction to Outdoor Leader Skills

-   New Leader Essentials

Each one of these courses emphasized leadership training, and all of
them focused on at least one aspect of the Scout Law.

## Wood Badge

The Boys Scouts of America has its own leadership training program for
adults, called Wood Badge. This is considered one of the pinnacle
training courses in Scouting.

The program takes place at a local Boy Scout Camp, usually over two
non-consecutive weekends. The attendees are organized into scout patrols
and treated as if they are, in fact, boy scouts.

I had resisted it for years because it seems to focus on outdoor skills.
Once I finally agreed to attend, I quickly realized that I had
misunderstood.

Yes, Wood Badge takes place outside and does consist of many days of
outdoor skills and team building, but that is only the superficial part
of the program.

Like everything else in scouting, its true purpose is to build leaders.
While we learned to cook over a fire and lash wood together with fancy
knots, we were also learning how to work together. We explored conflict
resolution and other leadership skills.

It was the equivalent of many corporate leadership training programs of
which I have been a part.

To finish Wood Badge successfully, a participant must complete five
"tickets" over the 18-months following the program. Each ticket is an
idea of the participant\'s choosing, approved by the Wood Badge "guide."
Each ticket should improve some aspect of scouting, for the benefit of
the district, council, or national program. It may not directly benefit
the scout troop itself. We were told to think bigger.

## Scout Leader Trainer

My final ticket as with the Boy Scouts was to become a certified trainer
in our District. I had decided it would be a good idea to pass on what I
had learned and help others grow as I had grown. The time had come for
me to train other leaders.

Over the following two years, I attended multiple courses on becoming a
trainer, attending the Central Florida "University of Scouting." These
new training opportunities allowed me to run several Scoutmaster
Fundamentals courses, a few Cub Scout Leader trainings, and one youth
leadership training course.

## Your Turn

Now it is your turn, or so I hope. The knowledge and wisdom I took from
my experience in Scouting can be applied just as well in the business
world.

Throughout the rest of this book, I will describe the 12 points of the
Scout Law and explain how you can apply it in your professional life.

So, come with me. I hope you find it to be fascinating, enjoyable, and
instructive ride.

