# What is the Scout Law?

One of the very first things I learned in Scouting was The Scout Law.
It's a set of 12 principles that every scout is expected to follow.
Before diving into each one in detail, I thought it would be good to
summarize them here, and then see how they might be relevant to leaders.

## The Scout Law Itself

### A Scout is **Trustworthy**.

A Scout tells the truth. He is honest, and he keeps his promises. People
can depend on him.

### A Scout is **Loyal**.

A Scout is true to his family, friends, Scout leaders, school, and
nation.

### A Scout is **Helpful**.

A Scout cares about other people. He willingly volunteers to help others
without expecting payment or reward.

### A Scout is **Friendly**.

A Scout is a friend to all. He is a brother to other Scouts. He offers
his friendship to people of all races and nations, and respects them
even if their beliefs and customs are different from his own.

### A Scout is **Courteous**.

A Scout is polite to everyone regardless of age or position. He knows
that using good manners makes it easier for people to get along.

### A Scout is **Kind**.

A Scout knows there is strength in being gentle. He treats others as he
wants to be treated. Without good reason, he does not harm or kill any
living thing.

### A Scout is **Obedient**.

A Scout follows the rules of his family, school, and troop. He obeys the
laws of his community and country. If he thinks these rules and laws are
unfair, he tries to have them changed in an orderly manner rather than
disobeying them.

### A Scout is **Cheerful**.

A Scout looks for the bright side of life. He cheerfully does tasks that
come his way. He tries to make others happy.

### A Scout is **Thrifty**.

A Scout works to pay his own way and to help others. He saves for the
future. He protects and conserves natural resources. He carefully uses
time and property.

### A Scout is **Brave**.

A Scout can face danger although he is afraid. He has the courage to
stand for what he thinks is right even if others laugh at him or
threaten him.

### A Scout is **Clean**.

A Scout keeps his body and mind fit and clean. He chooses the company of
those who live by high standards. He helps keep his home and community
clean.

### A Scout is **Reverent**.

A Scout is reverent toward God. He is faithful in his religious duties.
He respects the beliefs of others.

## How the Scout Law Applies to Leadership

The Scout Law provides a useful framework for leadership in a
professional setting. The 12 points of the law cover a range of traits
that are essential for ethical and effective leadership. By prioritizing
these traits, leaders can build strong relationships with their team
members, customers, and stakeholders, and create a positive and
productive work environment.

For example, a leader who prioritizes trustworthiness will inspire
confidence and build strong relationships with their team members and
stakeholders. A leader who is loyal to their organization and team
members will foster a culture of commitment and unity within the team. A
leader who is helpful and kind will encourage collaboration and support
among team members. A leader who is obedient to ethical standards and
legal requirements will create a culture of integrity and accountability
within the organization. By prioritizing these and other traits from the
Scout Law, leaders can cultivate a culture of ethical and effective
leadership in their organizations.

With that in mind, look at the list again. A Scout is:

- Trustworthy

- Loyal

- Helpful

- Friendly

- Courteous

- Kind

- Obedient

- Cheerful

- Thrifty

- Brave

- Clean

- Reverent

Wouldn't you like to work for someone who lives those principles? Is
there anything in that list you think wouldn't apply to a good leader?

Some might argue that "reverent" doesn't fit with leadership in a
corporate environment, but as you will see, I will argue that it does.
