---
subtitle: |
  12 Principles Every Leader\
  (or aspiring Leader) Should Cultivate

  By

  Michael D. Callaghan
title: The Scout Law of Leadership
---

Copyright © 2023 Michael D. Callaghan. All rights reserved.

walkingriver.com

# Important Author's Note

The Boy Scouts of America (BSA) has faced controversy in recent years
that have led to questions about its ability to uphold its values and
mission. However, it is important to acknowledge that the principles and
values embodied in the Scout Law remain relevant and applicable to
leadership in a wide range of settings. Traits such as trustworthiness,
loyalty, helpfulness, friendliness, kindness, obedience, cheerfulness,
thriftiness, bravery, cleanliness, and reverence are essential for
ethical and effective leadership, regardless of the organization or
industry. By focusing on these principles and values, leaders can
cultivate a culture of ethical and effective leadership within their
organizations, regardless of any controversy surrounding the Boy Scouts
of America.

While I am no longer personally affiliated with the BSA, I am extremely
grateful for my time in various leadership roles in the organization. I
learned many valuable lessons about leadership, teamwork, and nature. I
even learned some important things about myself.

# Before You Begin

Before you start the book, let me make you an offer. From time to time,
I offer some of my content to my fans for reduced prices, and sometimes
even free, in exchange for their honest feedback.

If you would like to be considered for these opportunities, please sign
up at <https://walkingriver.gumroad.com/signup>. All I need is an email
address at the top of the page. I promise not to sell or abuse it in any
way. I tend to send out no more than 1 or 2 emails per month, and I
don't do it every month.

# What is the Scout Law?

One of the very first things I learned in Scouting was The Scout Law.
It's a set of 12 principles that every scout is expected to follow.
Before diving into each one in detail, I thought it would be good to
summarize them here, and then see how they might be relevant to leaders.

## The Scout Law Itself

### A Scout is **Trustworthy**.

A Scout tells the truth. He is honest, and he keeps his promises. People
can depend on him.

### A Scout is **Loyal**.

A Scout is true to his family, friends, Scout leaders, school, and
nation.

### A Scout is **Helpful**.

A Scout cares about other people. He willingly volunteers to help others
without expecting payment or reward.

### A Scout is **Friendly**.

A Scout is a friend to all. He is a brother to other Scouts. He offers
his friendship to people of all races and nations, and respects them
even if their beliefs and customs are different from his own.

### A Scout is **Courteous**.

A Scout is polite to everyone regardless of age or position. He knows
that using good manners makes it easier for people to get along.

### A Scout is **Kind**.

A Scout knows there is strength in being gentle. He treats others as he
wants to be treated. Without good reason, he does not harm or kill any
living thing.

### A Scout is **Obedient**.

A Scout follows the rules of his family, school, and troop. He obeys the
laws of his community and country. If he thinks these rules and laws are
unfair, he tries to have them changed in an orderly manner rather than
disobeying them.

### A Scout is **Cheerful**.

A Scout looks for the bright side of life. He cheerfully does tasks that
come his way. He tries to make others happy.

### A Scout is **Thrifty**.

A Scout works to pay his own way and to help others. He saves for the
future. He protects and conserves natural resources. He carefully uses
time and property.

### A Scout is **Brave**.

A Scout can face danger although he is afraid. He has the courage to
stand for what he thinks is right even if others laugh at him or
threaten him.

### A Scout is **Clean**.

A Scout keeps his body and mind fit and clean. He chooses the company of
those who live by high standards. He helps keep his home and community
clean.

### A Scout is **Reverent**.

A Scout is reverent toward God. He is faithful in his religious duties.
He respects the beliefs of others.

## How the Scout Law Applies to Leadership

The Scout Law provides a useful framework for leadership in a
professional setting. The 12 points of the law cover a range of traits
that are essential for ethical and effective leadership. By prioritizing
these traits, leaders can build strong relationships with their team
members, customers, and stakeholders, and create a positive and
productive work environment.

For example, a leader who prioritizes trustworthiness will inspire
confidence and build strong relationships with their team members and
stakeholders. A leader who is loyal to their organization and team
members will foster a culture of commitment and unity within the team. A
leader who is helpful and kind will encourage collaboration and support
among team members. A leader who is obedient to ethical standards and
legal requirements will create a culture of integrity and accountability
within the organization. By prioritizing these and other traits from the
Scout Law, leaders can cultivate a culture of ethical and effective
leadership in their organizations.

With that in mind, look at the list again. A Scout is:

-   Trustworthy

-   Loyal

-   Helpful

-   Friendly

-   Courteous

-   Kind

-   Obedient

-   Cheerful

-   Thrifty

-   Brave

-   Clean

-   Reverent

Wouldn't you like to work for someone who lives those principles? Is
there anything in that list you think wouldn't apply to a good leader?

Some might argue that "reverent" doesn't fit with leadership in a
corporate environment, but as you will see, I will argue that it does.

# My History with Scouting

I participated in Cub Scouts as a youth in the 1970s, just as many of
others my age. I did not take long to discover that the program was not
for me. I quickly lost interest. The idea of sleeping on the ground in a
tent never really appealed to me.

When I turned 10 years old, I dropped out, never getting past Webelos.
Regretfully, as it turns out, I left the program just before it would
have started to become interesting to me.

## My Own Children

Fast forward a few decades. I was pulled back into scouting when my
oldest son turned 8 years old and joined the Cub Scout Pack chartered by
our church. Recalling my earlier experience, I wanted nothing to do with
it.

I soon discovered that it was not going to be my decision. My boys were
going to be scouts and as their father, I was going to be part of their
lives. That included scouting. I slowly and reluctantly got involved,
though it took a few years.

## Scout Committee and Roundtable

For the first year or so, my role was to drive my son to and from his
weekly cub scout meeting. I was comfortable with that arrangement. We
met in a church building in Nashua, New Hampshire. I brought a laptop
and sat on a sofa in the foyer once a week for a couple of years. No one
asked anything from me, and all was well.

Then my son turned 11. At that age, boys leave Cub Scouting behind and
join a Boy Scout troop.

We had recently moved to central New Hampshire, which had a much smaller
population density than southern New Hampshire. Not only were the scout
troops smaller, but many of them were sorely lacking in adult
leadership. It was apparent that I would no longer be sitting on the
sidelines.

I still remember the first "Roundtable" meeting I attended in Rochester,
New Hampshire. Roundtable is a monthly meeting for adult leaders in the
"district." A district is a geographic collection of scout troops.
Districts provide leadership and training and guidance to its troops.

I had been asked to represent our troop at the district meeting as a
"committee member." I was to introduce myself and work on getting our
troop's registration completed for the upcoming year.

During the announcements of my first roundtable meeting, someone entered
the room dressed in a gorilla costume. I do not remember why they were
dressed that way, but I vividly recall wondering, "what have I gotten
myself into?" If I only knew\...

Over the next few years, I found myself in a variety of administrative
roles, but never actually in a position of a scout leader. This suited
me perfectly, as I still had no desire to do the "outdoors" stuff.

The more I learned, the more impressed I became of the vast organization
required to pull off something of this magnitude. Troops are led by a
scoutmaster, who reports to a group of adults known as the scout
committee. The committee represents the troop at the District level.
Districts are organized into Councils. Councils report to the National
Scouting Headquarters. Each level has its own leadership, both volunteer
and paid. The local leaders are typically volunteers who have youth in
the program, or once did.

## Scoutmaster

Over the next few years, I was unable to avoid the inevitable call to
step away from the administrative roles and into real leadership of the
troop. Our troop needed a scoutmaster. I served as both an assistant
scoutmaster and scoutmaster over the years.

It was during this time that I really learned that scouting is more than
hiking, camping, and building fires. It is about leadership,
citizenship, and becoming responsible adults. Scouting is often called
"a game with a purpose." That purpose is building youth into the next
generation of our country's leaders.

## Training and Safety

The Boy Scouts stress training at all levels of the program. The most
important is that every adult leader must pass a criminal background
check and take Youth Protection Training every two years. No adult may
serve at any level of the troop without this basic minimum level of
training.

From there, every individual role and responsibility has one or more
position-specific training required before a person can service in that
role. Many of these training courses are offered online, but some are
only offered in person.

A few, such as a lifesaving, aquatics supervision, and shooting sports
can only be taught at nationally accredited scout leader training
facilities.

Throughout my decade in scouting, I completed more than two dozen safety
and leadership courses. Some of which appear below:

-   Trainer\'s EDGE

-   Venturing - Advising vs Leading

-   Train-the-Trainer (Fundamentals)

-   Scoutmaster/Assistant Specific Training - Classroom

-   Venturing Leader Specific Training - Classroom

-   Introduction to Outdoor Leader Skills

-   New Leader Essentials

Each one of these courses emphasized leadership training, and all of
them focused on at least one aspect of the Scout Law.

## Wood Badge

The Boys Scouts of America has its own leadership training program for
adults, called Wood Badge. This is considered one of the pinnacle
training courses in Scouting.

The program takes place at a local Boy Scout Camp, usually over two
non-consecutive weekends. The attendees are organized into scout patrols
and treated as if they are, in fact, boy scouts.

I had resisted it for years because it seems to focus on outdoor skills.
Once I finally agreed to attend, I quickly realized that I had
misunderstood.

Yes, Wood Badge takes place outside and does consist of many days of
outdoor skills and team building, but that is only the superficial part
of the program.

Like everything else in scouting, its true purpose is to build leaders.
While we learned to cook over a fire and lash wood together with fancy
knots, we were also learning how to work together. We explored conflict
resolution and other leadership skills.

It was the equivalent of many corporate leadership training programs of
which I have been a part.

To finish Wood Badge successfully, a participant must complete five
"tickets" over the 18-months following the program. Each ticket is an
idea of the participant\'s choosing, approved by the Wood Badge "guide."
Each ticket should improve some aspect of scouting, for the benefit of
the district, council, or national program. It may not directly benefit
the scout troop itself. We were told to think bigger.

## Scout Leader Trainer

My final ticket as with the Boy Scouts was to become a certified trainer
in our District. I had decided it would be a good idea to pass on what I
had learned and help others grow as I had grown. The time had come for
me to train other leaders.

Over the following two years, I attended multiple courses on becoming a
trainer, attending the Central Florida "University of Scouting." These
new training opportunities allowed me to run several Scoutmaster
Fundamentals courses, a few Cub Scout Leader trainings, and one youth
leadership training course.

## Your Turn

Now it is your turn, or so I hope. The knowledge and wisdom I took from
my experience in Scouting can be applied just as well in the business
world.

Throughout the rest of this book, I will describe the 12 points of the
Scout Law and explain how you can apply it in your professional life.

So, come with me. I hope you find it to be fascinating, enjoyable, and
instructive ride.

# Trustworthy

***Tell the truth and keep promises. People can depend on you.***

The first point of the Scout Law is to be "Trustworthy." Leaders must
inspire trust. They must do what they say they are going to do and never
give someone a reason to doubt it.

In today\'s business environment, honesty and transparency are essential
components of effective leadership. Trustworthy leaders inspire
confidence and build strong relationships with their teams, customers,
and stakeholders. This chapter explores how leaders can prioritize
trustworthiness in their pursuit of ethical and effective leadership.

Trustworthiness is one of the most important characteristics of great
leaders. It\'s easy to see how it can help with teamwork and
coordination, but it also has many other benefits. One of my favorite
quotes from Stephen Covey is \"trustworthy leaders inspire action.\"
People follow those they trust into battle and are willing to take risks
for them that they wouldn\'t for someone else. Trustworthy leaders also
make better decisions because their teams will be more likely to give
them honest input about their ideas and suggestions.

In my opinion, trust is the most valuable quality of leadership. It is
the glue that holds a team together through thick and thin. It is what
makes a leader successful. I see trust as the foundation of all other
qualities of leadership, such as respect and fairness. Without trust, a
leader has nothing to build upon and will not be successful in his or
her endeavors.

Trustworthiness can take on a lot of forms.

## Be True About Who You Are

At one of my earliest software development jobs, I worked for a small
company with only a few employees. The manager and owner of the company
trusted no one, it seemed.

He was also a bit of a micromanager, and he insisted on being kept
apprised of every minor detail. He even insisted on editorial control
over my résumé. This is not quite as odd as it might seem at first. When
the company would bid on new development contracts, some potential
clients would want to know the background of the developers who would be
doing the actual work.

This caused little angst for a year or two. In fact, I appreciated the
improvements he helped me make. I was happy that someone else was
looking out for my future employment prospects, even if that was not the
primary motivation. The trouble began when he asked me to falsify
information on my résumé.

The client for the project we were currently bidding on indicated that
they only wanted college graduates working on their project. I was the
only employee without a college degree, but I was also the only Windows
developer. The owner feigned ignorance of my lack of degree, even though
I had always been upfront about never having graduated. After he calmed
down, he suggested that I simply add a fake Computer Science degree to
my résumé, figuring that the client would never check. I refused.

As I recall, he added it himself and sent off the paperwork with the
bid. I do not remember exactly how I discovered the deception, but I did
and was furious that he intentionally misrepresented me to the client.

It was then I decided I could no longer work for him or the company in
good conscience. This was my integrity and reputation he was
compromising. I had to draw the line there.

I resigned on the spot.

## Keep Your Promises

Trust is earned by keeping promises. Those you lead need to know that
they can count on you to do what you say you will do. If they don't
trust that, they won't respect you.

For people to trust you, they must be able to count on your word and
actions. If they can\'t depend on those, they will begin to lose trust
in you and will eventually not respect your authority as a leader.

For example, if you tell your team that you will be at their meeting,
they must know that you will be there.

If someone on your team tells you something in confidence, they must
know that it will remain private.

I have had several managers who were absolutely not trustworthy. In
fact, I just told the story about the one who wanted me to falsify my
résumé. He also had the bad habit of blaming whoever wasn\'t in the room
for any problem that arose. This was typically just after someone left
the company, which happened often. I remember being in more than one
meeting with clients, where this manager would quickly blame a former
employee for any bugs and delays. I\'m sure that after I left, most
things were my fault for the next few months.

On the other hand, when you have leaders you can trust, everyone wins.

A few years ago, I found myself doing a job I wasn\'t very good at and
absolutely despised. Because I had trust in my leaders, I felt
comfortable discussing my situation with them. Not only did they
understand, but they also insisted that it was their responsibility to
help me find a place in the organization where I could contribute value
and would be happy.

They considered my growth, success, and job satisfaction to be high
priorities for them. They were not easy conversations to have, and I\'m
sure my leaders were inconvenienced. They never once complained, and
even went out of their way to help me find a new job within the company.

Had we not shared that trustworthiness, this discussion may never have
taken place. I would have been stuck in a job I didn\'t like, or more
likely would have left the company, which would have been a loss for
both of us.

## Admit When You Are Wrong

Trustworthy leaders make better decisions because their teams will be
more likely to give them honest input about their ideas and suggestions.
If the team doesn\'t trust the leader\'s judgment, then they won\'t tell
him or her things he or she needs in order make good decisions.

Trustworthiness does not mean that you are naive or gullible, however;
it simply means that you are honest and open with others. You don\'t
need to know everything about everything all the time...you just need to
be willing to listen when someone else knows more than you do on a
particular topic, or if they have more experience in a situation than
you do.

You don\'t need to always be right; in fact, being wrong can often lead
to better insights than being right all the time (because we tend not to
question our assumptions as much when we\'re right).

You need to be willing to admit when you are wrong, even when this is
difficult or embarrassing. You need to be willing to admit when someone
else is right, even if they don\'t know more than you do on a topic (or
if they are younger than you). You need to be willing to say \"I don\'t
know\" when there is something that someone else knows more about than
you do. You need to be willing to take advice from people who disagree
with you---not because they want your job, but because they genuinely
believe their ideas will work better.

Trustworthiness does not mean that everyone will like or agree with what
you say, but if they trust what comes out of your mouth then they will
listen and consider it seriously.

People who lack trust should never lead teams; without trust, no one
will follow them willingly, and even those who do follow will only do so
grudgingly.

# Loyal

***Show that you care about your family, friends, scout leaders, school,
and country.***

Loyalty is a valuable trait in leadership, as it helps build a strong
sense of unity and commitment among team members. A loyal leader is
dedicated to the mission and goals of their organization and actively
supports their colleagues and subordinates.

## Loyalty to Self

You first need to be loyal to yourself. If you don\'t take care of
yourself, you cannot take care of others. You cannot pour from an empty
cup. When you are in your best space, you can be a more effective
leader.

What are some ways you can take care of yourself?

1.  Make rest and relaxation a priority. It is okay to say no to things
    that aren\'t on your priority list.

2.  Practice self-care daily by doing something that makes you feel good
    about yourself. It may be as simple as taking a walk around the
    block or seeing a movie that you really want to see or reading a
    book or listening to music or meditating or making something with
    your hands, etc\...

3.  Take time to reflect on the past week and evaluate what went well
    and what could have been better. Do this every Sunday at the end of
    the week. This will help you get clear about what is important for
    you in life and relationships, etc\...

4.  Be true to yourself in all relationships - personal and
    professional. If someone asks for an opinion, give it honestly even
    if it may hurt feelings. Be clear about expectations so there are no
    surprises. If someone does something hurtful, forgive them but
    don\'t forget it.

A few years ago, I built a list of job and career objectives. It
contains everything that is important to me, things that I look for in
any job opportunity that comes my way. The priority of the items changes
from time to time, but the items themselves have remained pretty
constant for the better part of the last decade.

While I'm sure your list will be different from mine, I'm sharing some
of my objectives to give you an idea of what I mean.

-   Salary

-   Monday through Friday role

-   Opportunity to use cutting-edge technology

-   Keep software development skills sharp

-   Opportunities to mentor others

-   Work on projects with direct revenue impact

-   Short commute

Make your own list and review it often. Make sure that your job covers
as many of your priorities as possible.

## Loyalty to the Team

A good leader is loyal to those on the team, both above and below. In
fact, I would argue that it is often more important to be loyal to those
reporting to you. Why? Because it is a lot easier to be loyal to those
who are not in a position to fire you. A good leader will put his or her
people ahead of themselves.

A good leader also recognizes that the team is more important than
himself or herself. They understand that success of the team and
organization depends on everyone working together toward a common goal.
It does not matter what your title is, if you are going to be effective,
you have to make sure everyone feels valued and important. You do not
want anyone on the team feeling left out or undervalued. That is just
bad for business and bad for the team as well.

A good leader also knows how to delegate effectively and they understand
their role within the organization but they also know that they need
help from their staff members in order for things to run smoothly. Even
though you may have been promoted because of your leadership skills, it
does not mean that you no longer need others around you who can help
with various tasks throughout the day.

Loyalty is essential to the success of any team; you can\'t have a team
that functions well without it. This doesn\'t mean that you need to be
best friends with everyone on your team, but it does mean that they need
to believe that you are acting in everyone\'s best interests. If they
don\'t, then they won\'t be willing to work with you, and if they don\'t
work with you then your efforts will be wasted.

If you give someone an assignment, your team member must be able to
trust that you\'ll have their back in case something goes wrong.

Loyalty is essential for effective leadership because without it, you
cannot effectively lead your team. If your team does not feel that you
are loyal to them, then they will not listen to you and follow your
direction when needed. They will find other ways to accomplish their
tasks instead of listening to you because they do not have faith in your
ability to lead them and they do not believe that you will take care of
them if something goes wrong.

## Loyalty to the Company

When I was a teenager, a manager once gave me a very interesting piece
of advice that I have never forgotten. He said, "when you work for the
man, work *for *the man." What did he mean by that? He meant that when
you are an employee, you should do your job with all your heart and
soul. You should do a great job and do everything possible to make your
employer successful.

You should take pride in your work and make sure that you are the best
employee possible. If you want to get ahead in life, be loyal to those
who have given you an opportunity to succeed.

Do not waste your time wishing that things were different or doing
things half-heartedly just because they are required of you. Do your job
well every day with pride and enthusiasm, and good things will come to
you as a result.

I once told a different manager that I considered one of my primary
responsibilities to be making her and her leadership look good. I still
believe that and extend that to the company as a whole.

I\'m reminded of a line from the movie Mr. Smith Goes to Washington. The
main character, during his acceptance of his appointment to the US
Senate, said, \"But I *can* promise you this\... with all my might,
I\'ll do nothing to disgrace the name of Senator of the United States.\"

That attitude embodies everything I\'ve talked about in this chapter. In
your own life, do nothing to disgrace your name, your family, your
colleagues, your company, your town, your state, or your country.

That\'s loyalty.

# Helpful

We understand that we are part of a team and we care about each other.
Our coworkers can come to us with their problems, trusting that we will
do what we can to assist them in finding a solution.

Effective leaders prioritize the needs of their team members, customers,
and stakeholders and are always willing to offer support and assistance
when needed. Being helpful can take many forms, from providing guidance
and mentorship to simply lending a listening ear.

## Be proactive in offering assistance and support to team members

## Encourage the growth and development of others

## Provide constructive feedback to help others improve

## Foster a culture of collaboration and teamwork

## Be willing to take on tasks outside of your job description when necessary

# Friendly

We are friendly with our customers, coworkers, leaders, and everyone
with whom we interact. We are welcoming to all, regardless of background
or experience.

Friendly leaders build strong relationships with their team members,
customers, and stakeholders. By demonstrating warmth, empathy, and
approachability, leaders can create a positive and productive work
environment that fosters trust and cooperation.

## Build positive relationships with team members and colleagues

## Demonstrate empathy and understanding towards others

## Be approachable and accessible to others

## Create a positive and welcoming work environment

## Foster a sense of humor and levity to make work enjoyable

# Courteous

We are polite and gracious in both success and failure. We exercise good
manners in all situations and with all people. We deliver and receive
criticism without it getting personal.

Leaders who are courteous and respectful in their interactions with
others inspire loyalty and trust among team members and stakeholders.
Courteous leaders are attentive to the needs of others, communicate
clearly and effectively, and maintain a professional and courteous
demeanor in all situations. This chapter explores how leaders can
cultivate a culture of respect and cooperation within their
organizations.

Show respect and consideration for others, regardless of their position
or background

Communicate clearly and effectively with others

Be punctual and reliable in meetings and interactions

Show appreciation and gratitude for the work of others

Respond to the needs and concerns of team members in a timely and
respectful manner

This should go without saying, but how we treat others can have a
tremendous impact on how we ourselves are received. A good leader is
polite to everyone and always uses good manners.

Many years ago, I was on a business trip, and found myself in a
particularly crowded terminal at the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta
International Airport. Thunderstorms up and down the east coast had
jammed air traffic all along the eastern seaboard. Most flights were
delayed, and many were canceled. As you can imagine, people were not in
the best of moods. For me, it turned into a lesson on kindness and
humanity.

![James Stewart in
Harvey](media/image1.png){width="3.1666666666666665in"
height="2.4270833333333335in"}

In this world, you must be oh so smart, or oh so pleasant. Well, for
years I was smart. I recommend pleasant. \--Elwood P. Dowd, [Harvey,
1950](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0042546/)

I had just arrived from Texas to catch a connecting flight to New
Hampshire. The first leg was uneventful, but also uncomfortable. My back
ached and I needed to find some painkillers before my next flight. I
knew things were bad as soon as I got to the gate and saw the hordes of
unhappy travelers.

The line to speak to the gate agent was longer than I had seen in quite
some time, but I entered it anyway. The gate was some distance from the
airport\'s many shops, and I wanted to make sure that I had enough time
to find some aspirin or something before we boarded.

As I often do while waiting in line, I paid close attention to the
people in front of me, seeing how they interacted with the gate agent,
and vice versa. It is generally wise to be aware of someone's demeanor
before talking to them. What I saw was not promising. Everyone ahead of
me seemed to get more and more belligerent, causing the gate agent to
become more and more flustered.

The "gentleman" just ahead of me was the worst. He berated the poor gate
agent, a young woman I judged to be in her early 20s. He made a series
of unreasonable demands of her, as if there were anything she could
personally do about the storms or the flights. She was calm and patient
and showed amazing poise against someone who was apparently trying to be
as intimidating as possible. As she calmly explained that there was
nothing more she could do for him, he got angrier. Finally, he walked
away, muttering something about never flying that airline again. I
inwardly shrugged, thinking the airline would be better off without him.

Finally, it was my turn, or so I thought. Another man approached the
gate agent from behind the desk, and I quickly realized that he was her
supervisor. She asked me to give her a moment while the two of them
chatted, and I nodded my understanding. While I tried not to listen to
their conversation, they did nothing to prevent it. She calmly explained
to him that she had been standing at the desk by herself for more than
six hours without a break, dealing with countless upset passengers. She
had not eaten since breakfast (it was dark at this point) and her
replacement was late. Her supervisor seemed to empathize with her
plight, though I noticed he did not offer to help personally. He said
that he would go look for someone to relieve her, asked her to stay at
her post a little while longer, and then walked away.

Finally, the young gate agent turned to me, attempted a smile, took a
deep breath, and asked how she could help me. I smiled back and said,
"well, I came up here hoping to get a flight update, but I think I
already know the answer." She smiled a little brighter and agreed that
there was little good news.

I told her that I had overheard her conversation with her supervisor,
and that I may be able to do something for her. I had come to the desk
simply for a flight update and ask about the best place to get something
for my lower back pain, but her plight seemed worse than mine. I
retrieved a bag of mixed nuts from my prior flight and offered them to
her. I said, "it isn\'t much, but the protein might help until you can
get a real meal." Then I said to her, "I'm travelling alone and didn't
check any bags. If my seat on this flight can help a family get home
tonight, let them have it."

She replied that they were not looking for anyone at this point but took
my name (and the bag of mixed nuts), thanked me, and then took the next
aggravated customer. I walked away to find the painkillers, glad to have
a been a tiny bright spot in someone else's bad day.

Not long after, I heard my name over the gate loudspeaker system. "Would
passenger Michael Callaghan come to the desk, please?" When I arrived, I
was met by the same gate agent, who seemed to be in a much better mood.
She asked me if I would still be willing to give up my seat on the
flight, even if it meant not getting home until tomorrow. I asked for
details. I told her I would.

She then offered the following:

-   One night in a local hotel including a shuttle ride both ways.

-   Two meal vouchers, for dinner tonight and breakfast the next
    morning.

-   A First-class seat on the first flight out in the morning.

-   A \$200 voucher towards a future flight.

I called home and told my family I would see them around lunchtime
tomorrow. I took a shuttle to the hotel, which was only a few minutes
away. I enjoyed a relaxing meal, a good night sleep, free breakfast, and
an extremely comfortable flight the next morning. The storm had moved
out to sea, and the trip could not have been better.

Unlike the angry guy in front of me, I continue to fly on this
particular airline as often as I can. I sometimes wonder what he got for
letting his anger get the better of him and yelling at the gate agent. I
think I know the answer.

If the message you took from this story is, "try to bribe gate agents to
get flight upgrades," I respectfully suggest that you may have missed
the point. Please read it again. Though that was the outcome in this
case, it is not always.

A more accurate message is that you will not get very far in life being
driven by anger and treating others badly. Treat people with politeness,
courtesy, and kindness. Bridle your anger, even when you are right.

## Cumulative Effect

Regardless of the outcome of any particular interaction, the effects
will accumulate over time. You will feel better about yourself, kindness
and courtesy will become a habit, and you will become a person others
want to be around.

And one day, when you need help, you may find yourself accepting someone
else's kindness to get you through a difficulty of your own.

At my current day job, we value courtesy to our guests and employees
over everything but safety. Though this incident occurred many years
before my present job, I like to think back on it when pondering how my
actions and attitudes affect those around me.

Sometimes I forget, and this story is also a reminder to myself to
elevate my interactions with people, especially when having a bad day.

# Kind

***Treat others as you want to be treated. Never harm or kill any living
thing without good reason.***

We know that everyone is better off when we are kind to each other and
treat others the way we want to be treated.

Kindness is an essential trait of effective leaders. By demonstrating
empathy, compassion, and generosity towards others, leaders can build
strong relationships with team members, customers, and stakeholders, and
inspire loyalty and commitment. This chapter delves into how leaders can
prioritize kindness in their interactions with others.

Demonstrate compassion and empathy towards others

Celebrate the successes and accomplishments of others

Encourage and support team members during challenging times

Foster a culture of inclusivity and respect for diversity

Create a sense of community and belonging within the team

# Obedient

***Follow the rules of your family, school, and pack. Obey the laws of
your community and country.***

We know that bad things can happen when rules are broken, so we strive
to obey and honor the rules of our technology, company, community, and
nation.

Obedience is an important aspect of ethical and effective leadership.
Leaders who are obedient to laws, policies, and ethical standards
inspire trust and confidence among their team members, customers, and
stakeholders. This chapter examines how leaders can cultivate a culture
of integrity and accountability within their organizations.

Follow established policies and procedures within the organization

Respect the authority of those in leadership positions

Act in compliance with legal and ethical standards

Seek out guidance and feedback from others

Continuously seek to learn and improve as a leader

# Cheerful

Cheerfulness is a valuable trait in leadership, as it helps create a
positive and productive work environment. Leaders who are optimistic,
enthusiastic, and approachable inspire confidence and build strong
relationships with their team members, customers, and stakeholders. This
chapter explores how leaders can prioritize cheerfulness in their
interactions with others.

When problems arise, which they inevitably will, we maintain a smile and
happy disposition. We know that decisions made in anger are seldom the
correct ones.

Maintain a positive attitude and energy in interactions with others

Encourage and inspire team members during challenging times

Celebrate successes and milestones with enthusiasm

Foster a sense of optimism and hope within the team

Stay focused on the bigger picture and maintain a sense of perspective

People like to be around others who make them feel happy and cheerful.
As a leader, you want people to have you around. Happiness in people can
be infectious. Unfortunately, negative attitudes can also be infectious.
When you are negative, no matter well you try to hide it, people will
notice.

A few years ago, my career took a turn sideways. I suddenly found myself
in a role I neither sought nor was particularly qualified to perform.

My mood darkened. I complained about the work. I whined about my job. It
did not take long for people not to want to be around me.

Everything about my work began to suffer. My goals of becoming a leader
in the organization were quickly evaporating.

After a while, I finally realized that I needed to change. I had to find
some way to improve my situation.

I had already begun looking for another job, both inside and outside of
the company. I had a couple of interviews but none of them led to a new
role. At the same time, I continued to try to acquire the skills
necessary to do the work. I was unsuccessful at that, as well.

The trouble with those two courses of action is that the effects were
somewhat out of my control. I could not force someone to hire me. Nor
could I force myself to learn the job quickly enough to be as effective
as my coworkers.

Despite my efforts to learn on the job, it quickly became obvious that I
would be unlikely ever to excel. I was concerned that at best I would
produce mediocre work and would ultimately be labeled a mediocre
individual.

Throughout this entire experience, there was one thing that was always
within my control: my attitude.

I vividly recall what I see now was the turning point, the "ah hah!"
moment for me.

I was visiting one of our office buildings that I did not normally
frequent. Most of the people there did not know me or anything about my
recent struggles. Walking through the lobby I happened to run into
someone I had not seen in more than a year.

She had a tremendous smile on her face as she greeted me and asked, "How
ya doin'?" If she only knew. I opened my mouth, preparing to tell her
how horrible things had been since we had last spoken.

It was then that something clicked for me. She had no desire to hear me
whine about my job. She could do nothing about it, and even if she
could, I had no right to burden her with that.

I closed my mouth, rethought what I was about to say, put a big smile on
my face, and told her the following: "You know what? I'm healthy. My
family is healthy. And I work for one of the greatest companies in the
world. I'm doing great!".

I would not have thought it possible, but her expression lit up even
more. She beamed back at me and replied, "I am so glad to hear you say
that. You just made my day!"

As she departed, my spirits were lifted. I vowed to improve my attitude
and treat everyone the way I treated her that day.

People noticed. Coworkers began talking to me again even when they did
not have to. Some bolder individuals who had known me a bit longer
commented that something had changed in me for the better.

Not long after these events, I did finally land a new job within the
same company that matched my desires, skillsets, and experience. Can I
say for sure that it was because of my changed attitude? I will go out
on a limb and say that absolutely was.

I have heard it said that cheerfulness is one of the few things you can
give away and end up with more of it afterward.

As you go through life, both personal and professional, try to give away
as much cheer as you possibly can.

# Thrifty

***Work to pay your own way. Try not to be wasteful. Use time, food,
supplies, and natural resources wisely.***

We understand that software development projects and developers are not
cheap. We never waste the time and resources with which we are provided.

Effective leaders must be responsible and mindful in their use of
resources, from financial to human. Thrifty leaders find ways to
maximize efficiency, reduce waste, and use resources wisely without
sacrificing quality or effectiveness. This chapter delves into how
leaders can cultivate a culture of innovation and resourcefulness within
their organizations.

Be mindful and responsible with the resources of the team or
organization

Find ways to increase efficiency and reduce waste

Use resources wisely without sacrificing quality or effectiveness

Encourage a culture of creativity and innovation to maximize resources

Continuously look for ways to optimize processes and systems

# Brave

***Face difficult situations even when you feel afraid. Do what you
think is right despite what others might be doing or saying.***

Shifting technology and paradigms excite us. We embrace change, explore
the unknown, and take great pleasure in learning new things.

Effective leaders must be willing to take risks and make tough decisions
in pursuit of their organization\'s goals. Brave leaders have the
courage to challenge the status quo, embrace new ideas and approaches,
and stand up for what is right, even in the face of opposition. This
chapter explores how leaders can prioritize bravery and courage in their
leadership practices.

Take calculated risks to drive innovation and progress

Encourage others to think outside of the box and challenge the status
quo

Embrace new ideas and approaches to problem-solving

Be willing to make tough decisions and take action when necessary

Stand up for what is right and just, even in the face of opposition

# Clean

Maintaining a clean and organized workspace and promoting cleanliness
and hygiene among team members are essential components of effective
leadership. Clean leaders demonstrate professionalism in appearance and
demeanor, foster a culture of cleanliness and organization within the
team, and minimize waste and pollution. This chapter explores how
leaders can cultivate a culture of cleanliness and organization within
their organizations.

We exhibit clean coding practices. Whenever we modify code, we do our
best to leave it better than we found it.

Maintain a clean and organized workspace

Promote cleanliness and hygiene among team members

Demonstrate professionalism in appearance and demeanor

Encourage a culture of cleanliness and organization within the team

Respect the environment and minimize waste and pollution

What does it mean to be "clean" in a professional environment? How can
leaders keep themselves clean?

I offer a few examples below, but it will help to explain what I mean
first.

Leaders should be clean in their appearance, language, their
environment, and their actions.

## Attire

Leaders should be clean in their dress.

Almost 20 years ago, Hewlett-Packard merged with Compaq. HP was the kind
of company I would consider "old world" whereas Compaq was a "new world"
company. Those of us who worked for Compaq were accustomed to wearing
jeans or shorts with a t-shirt to work. Socks were optional.

HP, on the other hand, was an older corporate entity with many people
still wearing a white shirt and tie to the office.

Not long after the merger, my new HP manager had me fly to San Jose,
California for some meetings. Unfortunately, for me, I packed for the
trip based on Compaq attire and the fact that I was going to California
in the summer. My manager was not at all amused when I showed up to the
meeting wearing shorts and a New England Patriots t-shirt.

Obviously, the workplace has changed dramatically over the past few
decades. Suit and tie for men and dresses for women gave way to "casual
Fridays," to "business casual" every day, to "t-shirts and jeans" every
day.

It does not matter so much what you wear to work, if it fits in with the
company's culture. Wearing a 3-piece suit to work when everyone else is
in shorts will make you just as out of place as doing the opposite.

The most important thing you can do is be neat and clean in your attire,
regardless of what you wear.

You may have heard the adage: dress for the job you want, not the job
you have. This still true today.

## Grooming

We have probably all worked with at least one person whose grooming
habits leave something to be desired. It is not pleasant to be around
someone who smells bad.

I am not talking about the occasional heat- or exercise-related
incident, but someone who consistently seems poorly groomed.

My advice is simple. Do not be that person. It will absolutely harm your
chances of advancement. People will not want to be around you.

## Clean Language

Though it has become more acceptable in society, profanity has no place
in a professional setting or in your professional writing.

Many years ago, when I was still an *adolescent in training*, I lost my
temper and swore in front of my mother. The look on her face told me
that she was not only surprised but hurt. It was not as if she never
used profanity, far from it. For some reason she seemed shocked that her
only son would do so.

I made a promise to myself that day. I would never swear in front of her
again. I knew it would be difficult to avoid swearing around my mother
yet continue to do so at school and with my friends. I did not think I
was that smart or disciplined. Instead, I decided it would be easier if
I simply never swore again around anyone.

It has been more than 40 years, but I have kept that promise. I am not
saying I have been perfect, but as a rule, I never use any sort of
profanity, and I believe it has served me well.

The most surprising thing I have discovered is that people have noticed.
Some have even remarked on it, which has always caused me to stop and
think about it. My lack of profanity has become so much a part of who I
am, it is unconscious.

I am not a prude about it and rarely comment to others about their use
of profanity. The only reason I wrote about it here is because its use
has become more mainstream since I made my promise. I do not believe
society or corporate culture is any better for it. In fact, I believe
just the opposite.

Please do not use profanity in your technical tutorials, blog posts, and
especially not your business emails. It makes you appear neither smarter
nor more mature.

# Reverent

Effective leaders must be respectful of the beliefs and opinions of
others, and foster a culture of inclusivity and respect for diversity
within their organizations. Reverent leaders recognize and appreciate
the unique contributions of each team member, demonstrate humility and
gratitude in interactions with others, and encourage a sense of purpose
and meaning within the team or organization. This chapter explores how
leaders can prioritize reverence in their leadership practices and
create a culture of inclusivity and respect for diversity.

We treat everyone with the same respect we ourselves expect to receive.
Though we may not always agree, we can still honor and respect each
others\' options and beliefs.

When most people think about reverence, it is usually in a religious
context. Indeed, the Scout Law refers to reverence in exactly that
manner.

In a professional setting, you can think of reverence as respect:
respect for self, respect for your peers, respect for your company,
respect for your product or service.

It is important to be respectful of all of these things, both in your
words and your actions.

If you also happen to be religious, then show the appropriate respect
there, too.

Respect the beliefs and opinions of others

Foster a culture of inclusivity and respect for diversity

Recognize and appreciate the unique contributions of each team member

Demonstrate humility and gratitude in interactions with others

Encourage a sense of purpose and meaning within the team or
organization.
